Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricardo Loop and
the MG by Dr JD Gs. She's an assistant
professor of Anthropology at the University of Washington in
Seattle. Dr Gebb is an environmental archaeologist and ethno
biologist who employs an interdisciplinary research program to understand
how humans adapted their foraging practices and agricultural strategies
to new environments and have developed resilience in the
face of climatic and social change. And today we're
going to talk about foraging and the agricultural practices
of humans, paleo ethnobotany, the Tibetan plateau, the development
and spread of agriculture, the development of states, climate
change and some other related topics. So, Doctor Gatz,
welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. It's a pleasure to be here. And
also thank you for being the only person who's
ever pronounced my name correctly because we're both Portuguese.
I mean, if I didn't do it, it would
have been a shame for me anyway. OK. So
to start off with, uh tell us perhaps a
little bit about the kinds of places you have
done work on when it comes to studying, perhaps
the foraging and agricultural practices of humans.
Yeah, absolutely. So, um my work is primarily focused
in Asia. Um So I've worked um in two
places. So um I, you know, I consider myself
an archaeologist of ancient China and the Tibetan plateau.
So I work primarily in the People's Republic of
China. Um AND the region of China that I
work in um is Southwest China. Um So this
is the provinces of um of the Chinese provinces
of Sichuan, Yunnan and Guizhou. Um But more specifically,
um one of my key focus research areas has
been the Tibetan plateau. So I actually did an
undergraduate degree in Tibetan and Himalayan studies, that was
the first degree that I did. Um And so
the Tibetan plateau sort of always been a focus
of my research. And then um throughout my phd,
I actually shifted my focus to the Chengdu plain,
which is the slow lying plane in Sichuan Province.
But then following my phd moved back to doing
research on the Tibetan plateau and that's where my
current fieldwork project is in a National Park on
the eastern Tibetan plateau. Um And we sort of
the bulk of my research has been focused um
and just finished writing a book on the archaeology
of the Tibetan plateau. So, yeah,
a and why these particular places specifically, I mean,
is there any specific reason scientifically speaking for why
these places would be good places to really study
the the particular kinds of questions you're interested in
or is it just some uh something that is,
that was more accidental, let's say that you got
interested in those specific places.
So, so in terms of my own research, um
well, so, so I'll sort of answer broadly like
from the scientific perspective. So, you know, the Tibetan
plateau is a really interesting place to study the
impacts of climate change. Um BECAUSE the Tibetan plateau,
so, so areas of like high latitude and high
altitude experience the impacts of global warming with a
higher amplitude than places of low latitude and low
altitude. And so, you know, if you look at
the numbers, the Tibetan plateau is warming at the
rate of roughly double the global average. Um SO,
so, so, so it's a place that is currently,
you know, experiencing some of the biggest impacts of
climate change around the world. But this has also
been true historically. So whenever there are changes in
climate in the past, um the Tibetan plateau experienced
those changes more just because things happen with a
higher amplitude there. So it's a very interesting place
to study the impacts of climate change. Personally, for
me, it was actually um kind of by accident,
I I started off with a undergraduate degree in
Tibetan and Himalayan studies. And you know, most of
the way that those degrees are sort of oriented
is really, you know, very heavily focused on the
historic period in Tibetan, which is very closely intertwined
with the history and spread of Buddhism. Um So,
you know, I feel like I spent a lot
of that undergraduate degree, you know, learning how to
read Tibetan Buddhist texts and sort of realized that,
you know, my, my, I mean, while it was
very interesting and I have the greatest appreciation for
Buddhism and it's wonderful philosophy, um you know, and
certainly try to integrate that into my life on
a personal level. Iii I realized that like, my
academic interest was not in studying Buddhist text. And
I became interested in um some of the older
religions of Tibet, namely Bon, um which is uh
you know, which is just like a kind of
blanket term for sort of describing everything that was
present into that prior to the arrival of Buddhism.
And then sort of through that I became interested
in, in. Well, what was the early history of
this very fascinating place that ended up forming an
empire and realized that we actually know practically nothing
about it. And then that's how I became interested
in the, the theology of the Tibetan plateau because
I was like, wow, there's really this massive gap
in terms of our knowledge and that we only
really start, you know, understanding what's happening on the
Tibetan plateau, maybe around the earliest, the fifth or
sixth, but really, you know, sort of after the
sixth century ad but everything prior to that, we
know nothing about that. But yet archaeology has the
answer. So that was actually what led me to
become an archaeologist in the first place was that
kind of realization that while there's like a lot
of room to um to expand our knowledge here?
Great. So, but when it comes to the history
of humans in the Tibetan plateau, does it include
also foraging activities or have you focused mostly on
agricultural practices?
Um So I've also focused on foragers too. Um
And, and the reason is really that the Tibetan
plateau is sort of in, in this part of
Asia, this is one of the places that at
least, in my opinion, foragers have had some of
the longest history, they've been there for the longest
period of time. Um And um you know, where,
whereas agriculture spread and you know, replaced um forging
lifestyles earlier on in other parts of Asia here,
you know, on the Tibetan plateau forages were there
for a long time. And, and um and actually
in some of one of the things that I've
argued is that they, they really resisted the spread
of farmers um for a very, very long period
of time. And in fact, it's really not too
until the introduction of pastoral animals like sheep and
goat and then cattle to some extent, and the
introduction of wheat and barley. So basically following the
second millennium BC that I think that that people
started to truly move away from a foraging lifestyle.
Um Uh And in my opinion, it is these
foragers who were on the Tibetan plateau, these are
the ancestors of Tibetans today. Um That, that is
my opinion. I believe that there is direct continuity
um between, you know, people who were once foragers
on the Tibetan plateau and Tibetans today. Um And
that we can't really explain the peopling of the
Tibetan plateau through a simple replace, you know, demographic
replacement hypothesis.
So is then the Tibetan plateau, an area in
the globe where it's uh it's uh I mean,
it's a good place to study perhaps the transition
from foraging into agriculture or perhaps the steps it
took for people to, to really adopt agriculture as
the basis of their food economy.
Yes. Yeah, I think it's a really fascinating um
place to study it and, you know, one of
the things. So, so I I'll sort of back
up by saying that there, there's sort of two
kinds of spreads of farming uh onto the Tibetan
plateau. So the first one has to do with
um two crops that were domesticated in China, which
are broom, corn, and foxtail millet. Um So those
two crops were domesticated in Northwest China or somewhere
in northern China. And then um we see them
moving on to the margins of the eastern Tibetan
plateau um around, you know, the fourth um millennium.
Uh WAIT, sorry. Yeah, about the fourth sort of
millennium BC. Um Now, now they, they move presumably
with people who are farmers along the very low
altitude margins of the eastern Tibetan plateau. But then
we also see these same crops appearing in areas
of higher altitude and there are very complicated things
happen. So there's one archaeological site on the northeastern
Tibetan plateau called Z. And at Z, what we
start seeing happening is we actually see burials that
appear to be associated with moving farmers who came
to that site. And then we have burials that
are in a very different style with totally different
types of pottery that are probably the forager burials.
And so we see actual like physical interaction between
these two people, these two different groups of people
at this archaeological site and presumably the farmers brought
this millet with them that we find at the
same archaeological site. One of one of the very
interesting analyses that me and some of my colleagues
at Lanzhou University um carried out was we decided
to look at the proportions of weeds um in
that, in that assemblage from Zona. And what we
found is that it was mostly clean grain showing
up at the archaeological site, which means that farmers
were probably carrying the grain with them to the
site. It wasn't being grown locally on site, otherwise
we would have found the weeds. Um And then
they were engaging in these, you know, patterns of
exchange with these foragers like this was a trading
place. So then if we move further south on
the Tibetan plateau to an area called Chandu in,
in, in Tibet. And there is this very famous
site called Chengdu Kai rule, which is uh you
know, one of the um it was always sort
of hailed as like one of the earliest farming
sites on the Tibetan plateau. And that's because we
find milit at it. But there's really no evidence
at that site for any type of direct exchange
between these foragers um in high, you know, who
live in this high altitude site and between farmers
in lower elevations, the pottery is different, the technology
is different. The only thing that's showing up are
these millets. And it's possible that the foragers were
locally cultivating them. It's also possible that they were
exchanging them through these down the line trade and
exchange agreements. So, you know, to me this, so,
you know, in archaeology, we tend to have, we,
we sort of tended to have this assumption that
when you get grains showing up at an archaeological
site. Oh, that means that people were farming them.
So some of the things that I've argued in,
you know, in the particular context of the Tibetan
plateau is no, it actually doesn't mean this people
can trade grains over large distances. And in fact,
that's what Tibetans do today. There are many Tibetans
who are full time pastoralists and yet they have
barley in their houses that they're exchanging with other
Tibetans who live in lower altitudes, motivating the barley,
they exchange the barley for things like salt, hide,
milk butter, you know, all of the products of
pastoralism and sometimes even the products of hunting. And
so I'd argue that, you know, this is really
a ver a pattern that is, these patterns of
exchange are something that have characterized the Tibetan plateau
over very, very deep time. Um And they're, they're
not new and, you know, this is really just
a continuation of what people have been doing for
thousands of years. There are the patterns that we,
that we see today.
So when it comes to the development and adoption
of agriculture, I guess that there are very interesting
questions that I could ask you here because I
mean, whenever, for example, I hear people, I mean,
I'm not talking about scientists who actually do work
on this, but just the general population talking about
the adoption of agriculture and the agricultural revolution, so
to speak, people have these very common simplistic ideas
that we were foragers up to the point. And
then we, and then we, we found we found
agriculture and then suddenly the next day we, we
just adopted agriculture and we went on from there.
I mean, of course, people know that agriculture was
not developed in every single society across the globe.
At the same time, it's red across the globe.
But anyway, the people left these very sort of
simplistic ideas that it was one single event once
we found agriculture, then we went on from there
and it was just agriculture onwards. Uh But, uh,
I mean, actually
I can totally take that apart for you. Ok.
Ok. Ok. But just, just one last thing, actually,
if I remember correctly from a conversations I had
with other people on the show, even the idea
that it was one single event is not right,
because there's lots of evidence that foragers perhaps learned
that they could farm certain crops. But they uh
I mean, sometimes they were farming them other times
they dropped that and went on, went back to
just foraging again. And uh I mean, many times
it was a mix of those kinds of activities,
right? Yeah. And so, you know, so I'll just
address the last point quickly. So yes, that's exactly
what we see on the Tibetan plateau. So one
of the outcomes of my work was that due
to climate change, people could actually no longer cultivate
these millets on the Tibetan plateau and we'll maybe
get back to that later. But, but these millets
fell out of cultivation and people just went back
to foraging to what they were doing before. But
to address your first point on the development of
farming. So, you know, back um in the age
of Gordon child, who was an Australian archaeologist, kind
of at the turn of the century, you know,
it was we described the origins of agriculture as
the Neolithic revolution and I think today our understanding
of the process could not really be farther from
that. Um I think that some of the most
interesting ideas about how agriculture first came to, you
know, how people first started farming is really, has
really been the recognition that people have always interfered
with. Um Yeah, and maybe interfered isn't the, isn't
the right word, but people have always lived in
symbiosis with the plants and animals around them. And
when you live in symbiosis with a plant or
with an animal, you have evolutionary impacts on each
other's lifestyle. They're evolutionary outcomes of that. So some
of in my opinion, the most fascinating research about
the origins of agriculture has really focused on the
nature of those symbiotic relationships. Um AND how small
unintentional decisions that are made by humans as they're
gathering plants or as their harvesting plants can lead
to the emergence of traits that are associated with
domestication. Um So, you know, one of the, you
know, kind of most famous examples of this. Um
AGAIN, drawing from Asia is probably the work of
one of my colleagues, Dorian Fuller. Um And what
what Dorian you know demonstrated was that um that
that rice, rice and other grain crops as they
are becoming domesticated, start exhibiting a non shattering rus,
right? Which is um the part that attaches the
grain to the rest of the plant and wild
plants when the crop ripens, when the grain ripens
that automatically de hess so that it falls off
the plant. What starts to happen. Well, in, in
all, in all populations, including wild populations, there's a
small percentage of a mutant that is the non
shattering racket. And as people are harvesting the crop,
they are unintentionally selecting for the ones that just
happen to remain stuck to the plant, which are
the domestication trade mutants. And if you do that
over thousands of years, you start to, to select
for that mutant. Um And you, and it starts
appearing in higher, higher and higher proportions and then
this leads to domestication. Um But now both the
humans and the crops have entered this trap in
which they rely on each other. The humans rely
on the crop for its grain and then the
crop relies on its humans because it can't really
spread itself without human intervention. Um So, so, so,
so that's for me, you know, one of the
most fascinating parts about some of this recent research
on, you know, the origins of agriculture is that
not only was this a very gradual process, but
it's really, you know, we, I think that there,
there tends to be, you know, in our sort
of in many of our social darwinist perspectives about
how things changed in human history. This idea that
man is at the top of the heap, right?
That we are, you know, the the primary um
inventors, we are the masters of nature, we are
the ones that change the course of history. And
yet when you really kind of get into the
mechanics of how things like domestication happen. I think
one of the things that we realize is that
actually we're not, we're just entangled with ecologies, we're
entangled with plants, we're entangled with animals. And we
are just a part of evolutionary processes and, and
a part of nature just like these other plants
and animals are. And what's happened throughout human history
has just been the outcome of small unintentional actions
and symbiosis shaping each other. So for me, that's,
you know, I think one of the most fascinating
things about studying the origins of farming today is
sort of kind of reassessing humans role in this
and coming to the realization that, you know, that
that we aren't monsters of nature, we're part of
nature. And I actually think that this is where
some of the most important lessons lie for our
future, right? We, we tend to have this vision
that we can science our way out of anything
or that we can invent solutions to the climate
crisis that we're in or that we can invent
solutions for enough food. But I think that critical
to part of that picture is just really realizing
where we sit in nature and kind of taking
accountability for our role and for our impact. And
that's kind of maybe where some of the answers
lie if that makes sense. So I can get
into some more of that later
social darwinism, for example. And the basic idea that
we are masters of nature in instead of being
part of nature and in the sort of symbiosis
with it, uh uh associated with that, I guess
that we also have or add, even though that,
that idea is still around. Unfortunately, at the idea
that uh of dividing, um, I mean, human societies
into the civilized ones and the sort of primitive
ones as if people that lived in the primitive
societies were not able to build civilizations if they
have the conditions for that. Of course, and I
guess that we're going to get a little bit
more into that into really the ecological and other
kinds of factors that play a role into how
and why societies move from a mostly foraging uh
or, or uh societies mostly based on foraging to
societies that are based in agriculture. And then of
course, the rest that follows from that over time.
Right.
Yeah. And, and I mean, you know, one of
the things I'd sort of argue about that is
that, um people, you know, through thousands of years
of symbiosis of living in the place that they
live, people, people around the world have always found
harmony with the harmony and the best way to
live in the place that they live. Right. You
know, and I'm sort of talking prior to the
industrial revolution here. Right. Or prior to, you know,
globalization, right? And the sort of forces that are
that, you know, we encounter with globalization and colonialism.
People, you know, people develop because their lives depend
on it. People develop the adaptations that work the
best for them. And, and I think that that's,
you know, one of the sort of social darwinistic
thoughts that we really need to take apart is
this idea that, that there's kind of an end
point or that there's one direction that things could
or should move in. Um, WHEN that's not the
case, um It makes perfect sense for many people
around the world to have only relied on foraging
or hunting. Um And there really was, you know,
that was the solution, um, for the environment that
they lived in and every place is different. Um
And, and, and I think that, um, you know,
part of the unfortunate thing around the world is
that we've seen, um, you know, both with the
expansion of colonial empires, um, and colonialism, you, you
know, the, the, the, the, the idea that everyone
should do the same thing or should aim for
this one goal. Whereas we, we really should not,
um, that's maladaptation actually, um, to, uh, to, to
different environments. So, you know, well, we, we, we
can talk more about this, um, as we kind
of get into, um, into some specific examples. But,
um, you know, and, and, you know, just to
sort of speak to to that point. Um, YOU
know, in, in, in, in many places, the divide
is also just not that clear. So for instance,
even just even Tibet, I mean, so Tibetans today
rely on quite extensive, um, you know, amounts of
foraging and non-domestic crops. They also relied, you know,
up until there was a ban on hunting throughout
much of the Tibetan plateau. Recently, hunting was always,
always critical um, to the Tibetan diet. So there's
really, you know, there's not like the sudden switch
right between the two kind of modes of um
modes of production, which is, you know, which is,
which is, which is very interesting. And then even
in southwest China, you know, in low lying areas
with like some of the highest population density on
earth foraging is still important and still was hunting
as well. So, um, you know, the, the clear
cut divide between this is not as clear as,
um as people once thought, I think,
uh but when it comes to the question that
many times people ask us to why and how
people, I mean, even though they might already have
been aware of farming and some farming practices, why
do they make the move to from uh I
mean, mobile societies to settlement? Why and how do
they
set? Yeah. So, so I think, um, you know,
one of the most interesting ideas, um you know,
specifically relating to agriculture around why people would settle
down is this idea of entrapments, right? And entanglements.
So once you start inter well, not interfering, but
you know, getting into symbiosis with a grain, right,
like wheat or barley, and this grain starts developing
the non shattering rus. And now the grain needs
you to replant it and you need it seed
and then you need to store some for the
next year, you get into the situation where you
just can't move around anymore. Um And, and, and
it's really because of that, that the, the amount
like the way in which you've become entangled with
this plant that you cannot extricate yourself from that
trap anymore. Um I think is, is one of
the, you know, the ways that we could think
about it, you're now you're now stuck in this
trap and I mean, and it, and it's not
necessarily a bad trap to be stuck in either,
right? But, you know, you, you, you can't, you
can't just easily get out of it now because
you have to plant it. Um, YOU have to
store it and then you have to sort of
start creating all of the things that make that
planting and storage necessary like jars to store your,
your grains in. And then you need to have
big enough jars and you can't move those jars
around. Um And then you need all of the
stuff to process the grain like the grinding stones
and those get too heavy to carry around with
you Um, so, so I, so, so it's sort
of, you know, when I think about like, shifts
from, uh, high mobility to sed, I think they're
really sort of happening because of, of, of that
continuum. Right. It's really how, how you get ho
how you become entangled with the plants and animals
that you're living with and working with on a
daily basis and it's the, in the spec very
specific interactions with the plants and animals that get,
you, get, you stuck in a little way and
make you sort of have to settle down. Um
A and when societies really moved to being uh
more based on agriculture, of course, we know now
that that move wasn't uh advantages in all aspects
because uh uh uh the diets of early farmers
at least were worse than the diets of foragers.
I mean, when looking at the skeletons, they didn't
grow as much, for example, they were more prone
to certain diseases to uh dental cavities and all
of that. So, but in terms of the demographics,
because that's at least one point that many times
researchers point to that, even though they had all
those disadvantages, when it came to the demographics, it
was easier to really grow societies based on agriculture
than on foraging. Uh But, but was it always
the case that a move to agriculture really uh
uh brought with it demographic advantages?
Well, um so, so I think um I, I
mean, I don't necessarily think of it as an
advantage per se. But, um, so, you know, when
I think about some of the work of people
who, um, so I'm thinking of a French scholar
called Jean Pierre Bouquet right now, um, who really
did work on the mechanics of, you know, demographics
around, um, the start of when, you know, when
people start first started farming and he was really,
well, Jean Pierre bouquet was really interested in understanding
as well. Why, you know, why, why in farming
societies do we see, you know, higher, higher levels
of population? So, so, so one of the things
that Jean Pierre Boel argued is that the mechanics
of, of, of what is happening um really has
to do with mothers and Children, right? Um And
kind of in a way a little bit less
to do with farming. So, you know, when you're
um more mobile, in his opinion, um your mothers
are carrying their Children for longer, like physically carrying
them for longer, right? And um are breastfeeding for
longer. Um And um when you're breastfeeding that leads
to um you know, a period of lactation or
amenorrhea, right? So you are not able to as
easily get pregnant while you're while you're breastfeeding. And
so that like by necessity, just, just the fact
of carrying your child around for longer is kind
of spacing out um birth, right? And, and I
think it's really on that kind of critical point
that, that he focused, that it's really, that that's
happening when people, you know, move towards more sedentary
societies. It's, it's not anything necessarily per se about
farming. It's that the birth interval is becoming less
spaced out because people are maybe breastfeeding for shorter
periods of time. And, and I mean, you know,
we, we obviously don't have like archaeological, very good
arch. I mean, I mean, that would be really
fascinating project somehow to, to look at which is
like, you know, can we determine how long people
were actually breastfeeding for um archaeologically? I don't, I'm
not really sure how one would approach that question.
Um But, you know, I think that, that the,
the answers of where we start seeing demographic shifts
probably have something to do with that. And then
I think that he also added in his research
that um that with farming, you sort of get
um you know, uh access to and I don't
know that I necessarily agree with this point, but
that you get access to, you know, grains that
can be used to wean babies off earlier. And
then, you know, in some societies around the world,
you also get access to milk products um that
can kind of um you know, make that transition
from, from, from breastfeeding happen earlier. I actually think
that there are probably equal amounts of like soft
foods that foragers um can feed, you know, feed,
feed their Children. So, you know, when I think
about my, my own work on the Tibetan plateau.
There are all kinds of tubers and root crops
um that, you know, young Children um can be
fed. But, but it's also, I mean, I think
that part of this has to do with culture,
right? The, the age at which you stop breastfeeding
is a very culturally bound thing. Um And maybe
there were shifts around the culture of that in
the past. Um You know, we, we have a
very different culture here. Um You know, and um
in the United States, for instance, to most nations
around the world where we cut off breastfeeding actually,
incredibly early. Um YOU know, and maybe around, you
know, sometimes six months or age one, whereas um
most people around the world will breastfeed their Children
for much, much longer. And we really don't know
what that looks like right in the deep past.
But I, I think that, that, that the changes
in demography probably have much more to do with
that than, and then, and that's related to Seden,
but, but kind of different, but it's really maybe
about that practice of how mothers are, are rearing
Children than anything else.
All right, that's really fascinating because as time goes
on, we see that the picture of the move
from foraging to agriculture is much more complex and
interesting actually than we thought. So let me ask
you another kind of question now. So you've also
of course, study the geographical dispersal of props through
genetic analysis. But uh what do you do there
and how do you do with? Exactly.
Yeah. So, so, so I um have primarily collaborated
with geneticists. I'm not a geneticist, um myself. And,
um, so, so, so what I have really contributed
to the work that I've carried out with geneticists
has been the climate modeling component. Um So, crops
or any plants actually are limited, um you know,
in several ways by their ecology. So, you know,
we have things that are called plant niches. So
that's why, you know, in some biomes, we've got
deserts and other biomes, we've got tropical forests. And
there are two things that are really constraining where
different types of plants grow. So the first one
that most people think about is water, but actually
one of the primary variables is temperature, right? Um
Like, you know, you can't grow bananas in Greenland
because it's too cold, right? And likewise, you know,
you can't grow apples in, in tropical regions. And
that's because different plants are, are adapted to the
temperature of different regions. So some of the work
that I've done has been trying to track how
that thermal niche of plants has shifted throughout time.
So I've, I've, I've worked on creating um paleo
climate reconstructions, um downscaling those to a sort of
local level. So we can see how they're changing
over space and over time and then predicting how
past climate change led to shifts in the plant
niche. And so I've done that for um for
a couple of different regions. Um But maybe I'll,
I'll sort of start with the Tibetan plateau and
then I'll talk and, and millets and wheat and
barley and then I'll talk about rice afterwards. So,
um on the Tibetan plateau, one of the things
that our niche modeling showed is that um so
just to kind of like back up and give
you a history of Holocene climate. So the holocene
is the past 10,000 years and over the course
of the 10 of the past 10,000 years, there's
sort of several key climatic transitions that happened. So
the early part of the holocene sort of after,
you know, the end of um you know, the,
the the glacial period, what we have is for
the first sort of 4000 ish years of that
with a high stand around, you know, 6 to
8000 BP or before present, we have something that
people refer to as the holocene climatic optimum. These
are relatively warm temperatures in the early part of
the Holocene around 4000 years ago. Um There is
this dip in temperature that takes place that's also,
you know, associated with arid a decrease in solar
insulation around the world. Um That people often refer
to as the 4.2 ky A event, you know,
the 4.2 K a year event. Um uh AND
it's this kind, it's, it's, it's a bond event,
right? Which is the kind of, um you know,
type of climatic term we ascribe to an event
like this. And it's not really an event, actually,
it's not something that really happens that suddenly it's
kind of the slow to cooler temperatures that then
characterized the rest of the holocene, including the holocene
that we lived into up to about 100 years
ago, right, with global warming. So, so, you know,
there's just this trend towards cooler temperatures that we
were actually in up until about 100 years ago.
So one of the things that was fascinating to
me when I was researching the archaeology of the
Tibetan plateau was the shift away from millet farming
on the margins of the Tibetan plateau, they're there
and then they go away and then later, they're
replaced by wheat and Barley. And one of the
things that I wanted to understand was, well, why
does this shift happen? Um And so I applied
these climate models and one of, you know, the,
these uh niche models that um that I worked
on creating along with some other colleagues. And one
of the things that became immediately apparent was that
there simply was not enough of a thermal niche
to keep growing broom and foxtail millet. So these
are two crops that were domesticated in Northwest China
places that actually, you know, experience pretty high temperatures,
they have minimum germination um you know, requirements of
about 15 C, which is something pretty high when
you're on the Tibetan plateau. And there simply just
was not sufficient temperatures following 4000 years ago for
people to keep cultivating these crops on the Tibetan
plateau. And so they fell out of the diet.
Um AND then people return to foraging and doing
all the other stuff we talked about then um
around the same period of time you get wheat
and barley that move onto the Tibetan plateau. So
these are two crops that were cultivated in the
fertile crescent first. And then um you know, through
the process of trans Eurasian exchange, they eventually moved
to the Tibetan plateau. Um And, but these are
two crops and in particular, barley crops that are
adapted to the cold. And so they were the
crops that ended up taking off. But part of,
you know, the niche modeling that we carried out,
part of what that argued was that this was
the reason why, right? This was because of fundamental
adaptations to temperature of these different crops that this
happened. So where I've really collaborated with geneticists on
these niche models was um I worked with a
group um from uh NYU from New York University
um with a B geneticist um whose name is
Michael Perugino. Um He's a geneticist who focuses primarily
on the genetics of rice. And um and with
um uh with uh one of his students, Rafael
gua. Um uh AND uh and, and part of
what my team contributed to that was that um
we uh models the, so, so, so we modeled
the thermal niche of rice and how that changed
and how that correlated with the genetics of rice.
And here's what we found. So, um there are
two, there's, there are several different populations of Asian
rice. So you have the forms of rice that
were domesticated in India. And then you have the
forms of rice that were domesticated in East Asia
and within East Asian rices, those are known as
the Oria Japonica complex. And there are two key
different types of Orzo Janica. So you have tropical
forms of uh Orica that are adapted to tropical
environments and that are the ancestral type and then
you have temperate types that are, that are adapted
to temperate and environments and they come, they, they
arise later in the genetic clock, they come about
later. So um when Rafa was working with the
genetic data, one of the thing, well, when Rafa
and Michael were working with genetic data, one of
the things that they noticed that was pretty fascinating
was they were looking at genetic clock and they
were looking at the timing of when temperature poca
arises and it all pointed to the 4.2 k
event. So we contributed our niche model and what
we showed actually happens around that period of time
was that all of the areas where tropical Japonica
was once cultivated, moved south. But yet people still
kept cultivating rice in those areas that was once
the niche of tropical Japonica. So suddenly, there was
with this climatic event, there was this huge evolutionary
pressure that was placed on those land races of
rice in that area that once used to be
in the tropical niche to develop this temperate adaptation.
And then once this temperate adaptation was developed, then
that itself fuels the expansion of rice farming into
northern Asia like Japan. Um AND um and further
north. But, but we argued that it was really
because of that climatic event that that adaptation took
place, that was the climatic event that placed both
huge pressure on farmers to select varieties of rice
that were, you know, adapted to um to this
new change in climate. So that's how I worked
with um with plant geneticist on this. And it's
been, it's been pretty fascinating. Um Then we're actually
working on a new paper which is not out
now. But um you know, where, where we take
the past um 10,000 years of data on where
rice has grown. Um And um you know, one
of the things that we found is that large
parts of the world where rice is cultivated today,
some of the key rice cultivation areas, a key
key areas of rice cultivation around the world are
going to experience temperature conditions that are nothing like
anything that they've ever known in the history in
which rice has been cultivated. Um And fact, they're
going to fundamentally surpass that thermal niche. They will
become hotter than the thermal niche for rice has
ever been. And we think that they may exceed
rice's thermal niche. Um So this isn't published yet.
I can't talk about it too much. But, you
know, that's the sort of forward looking implications of
this. So it's a pretty, it was a pretty
sobering message for us to, to realize that
a and so when it comes to this climate
change, you're referring to there, how did it impact
foraging societies? Because there you were referring mostly to
how it impacted crops and farming, how about foraging
societies? Well, um you know, I actually think they
were a lot more resilient to this. So on
the Tibetan plateau, you know, as far as we
can tell, people just kind of went back to
doing what they were doing all along. Um And
I, I mean, I'm sure it had impacts on,
you know, the availability of certain types of wild
plants that people were cultivating, probably also on the
movement of wild game um as well. And, you
know, that's a fascinating area of research honestly that
we do not understand very well yet, it's a
little more complicated to model that type of thing.
Um BECAUSE we, you know, we understand less about
what the thermal constraints are on wild plants and
then particularly animals because they're mobile. Um But, but
that would be something very interesting I think to,
to, for somebody to really look into is like,
how does, how did that change in climate impact
overall resources on the Tibetan plateau? And I don't,
I don't know the answer. Yeah. But, but, but
what I can say about it, what I can
say about it is this is that we lived
in that world up until 100 years ago. That,
that, that cooler world that started 4000 years ago.
That was the world of the, that was the
world that Tibetans have adapted to right over the
past 4000 years. And that was the world that
they lived in, you know, up until global warming
started, right? And that we all lived in up
until global warming started. And, and, and so all
of the adaptations that humanity has made in our
farming systems and everything else over the past 4000
years has been to this cooler world and we're
baring out of it very, very fast. Um
Yeah, we, we'll come back to climate change actually
in the modern world uh toward the end of
our conversation. Yeah. Uh But uh you've also written
or done work on a lost foraging opportunities for
East Asian hunter gatherers due to rising sea levels
since the last maximum. Yeah.
Sure. Absolutely. So, um, so this is working with
um my post doctoral advisor and one of his
um who's Jerry Mitrovica and one of his students,
uh Jackie Osterman, um who's now at um at
Columbia University with them on, you know, just so
they are. So, um my, my postdoc advisor, Jerry,
he, he was a sea level modeler. Um YOU
know, and has created some of the most accurate
models for both forward looking and past looking sea
level rise. Um And what we did was we
applied their model of sea level rise from the
last glacial maximum to the present day to East
Asia. And one of the things we found, which,
you know, was something people knew that we really
kind of defined the extent of it. In that
paper was that during the last glacial maximum, there
was this massive open continental shelf along the East
China Sea board, you know, that kind of connected
Korea to the rest of China that, you know,
connected um Taiwan to the rest of China, for
instance. Um And there was this massive open continental
shelf where we would expect that foragers would have
been very active, right? Like this would have been
an area where people would have been out on
the um you know, the edges of the marine
coast, foraging fishing, doing whatever. Um And this massive
territory was lost with sea level rise at the
beginning of um the Holocene. Um So there's this
event called meltwater pulse one A where, you know,
over a period of 200 years I believe, you
know, this massive continental shelf was basically covered in
water again. Um And so, you know, one of
the take, I mean, I think really just the
key take home lesson there is that we're missing
a massive part of our understanding of human adaptation
in Asia because it's underwater. Um It's literally underwater
on this continental shelf. And so we don't really
understand what foragers were actually doing during that critical
transition time between the lost glacial maximum in the
early years of Holocene because it's lost. Um But
there are probably far more maritime adaptations that we
just don't know about. Um So, you know, there's,
it's, it's really, um, I think that there's a
huge amount of like underwater archaeology that could be
done um on this continental shelf to help resolve
um some of those issues. But it's, it's difficult,
it's very difficult work carrying out underwater archaeology, especially
when you're dealing with forager sites because they're so
ephemeral and hard to find. Um So it's a
real, it's a real challenge. But, but I would
say,
yeah, but do you think that at least what
we, with what we know that these rising sea
levels would have uh propelled, or at least in
a way forced some of these foraging societies into
adopting agriculture because of lost foraging opportunities or not?
Yeah. I mean, it, it certainly would have created,
you know, reduced foraging areas for them and then,
you know, kind of higher demographic pressure on the
areas where there was still land because people had
to move inland. Right. Um, OF course, they had
much, much lower population densities. Right. So, um, um,
and, you know, it may have prompted some type
of intensification of, um, gathering of their resources that
then settle the process that eventually led to domestication.
But this, um, you know, this did happen quite
a bit earlier than, you know, when we start
seeing like the kind of first signs of cultivation.
But it certainly, you know, it certainly would have
led to shifts in demography, increased populations, you know,
in the area that was um now remaining and
then possibly intensification of some resources too, um as
well as an outcome of this. So, so, yeah,
you know, clearly had a massive impact. Um AND
we, we need to learn more about what was
happening out on that continental shelf to truly understand
this like period of transition in, in East Asia.
So do you think that what we've been talking
about when it comes to the Tibetan plateau and
East Asia? I mean, these models and the factors
that we've been talking about the ecological and environmental
factors that behind crop dispersal and the adoption, the
development and adoption of agriculture would extrapolate possibly to
other areas of the globe. Like for example, the
near east, North Africa, the Americas and so on.
Absolutely. Yeah. So, I mean, there, there's a lot
of you know, research in the near east and
across the Americas too. So, I mean, so, you
know, some of my students um work in the
Americas and I think that, you know, um so
I'll just highlight the work of one of my
phd students, Molly Carney. Um So she carried out
work on um this plant called CUS, which is
um a bulb that is native. Um So, so
it's a, it's, it's kind of closely related to
a lily or a plant like that, right? And
it's a bulb plant that is native to here,
to here where I live right now, the Pacific
Northwest. Um AND um it was a, you know,
a a key food um in this area and
part of what Molly um demonstrated. So um bulbs
are so what a bulb is, is it's basically
the stem, right? Of a plant that becomes um
kind of enlarged and there are scales um kind
of like an onion, right? So, you know, if
you think about what an onion looks like it
has like these different scales um that are that,
you know, wrap around each other and um and
chemists develops um one scale per year, right? Um
And that's how it grows. And so what Molly
did was she looked at archaeological assemblages of chemists
and what she found was that people were intentionally
harvesting the larger or older chemists leaving the younger
chemists in the ground so it could grow um
And I believe, you know, that she demonstrated that
this was a pattern that was several 1000 years
old. So you know that there just right there
that shows that people have been intentionally cultivating this
plant. This is not just, you know, people going
around and grabbing random stuff, you know, they're like
very intentional practices of how you care for this
plant, of how you encourage its growth and and
then how you harvest it in a sustainable way
that have been practiced for several thousands of years.
So that's just one example, right? So, so you
know, there are plenty of examples of how people
are both, you know, constructing the niches in which
plants can grow around the world. And so, yeah,
I would say that these examples definitely um are
things that can be applied globally and that many,
many different people have applied globally um to, to
different situations. Yeah.
So in our evolutionary history, have we had a
positive impact in enhancing biodiversity in specific places? Because
of course, I mean, today we're having a very
negative impact in biodiversity and also many times when
looking back in our revolutionary history, sometimes people talk
about the extinction of mega phone in Oceania, in
the Americans and so on. So, I mean, can
we take some credit here for at least in
certain periods and places having had a positive impact?
Yeah. Well, um so actually, you know, this kind
of um relates a little bit to um my
current project. Um So I um I work with
um community members um who are Sharko Tibetan speakers
um in eastern Tibetan, the former Tibetan province of
Amdo in a place called um the Zhoo National
Park in the People's Republic of China, um which
is known as Zade and Tet. Um And this
is a national park. Um AND it's also a
national park that happens to be located in one
of the most biodiverse regions on, on on earth,
which is the H Dan mountain chain, so characterized
by very high biodiversity. Um So in the belief
that the Tibetans who live there um may be
negatively impacting the biodiversity. Um Government policy has wanted
to move people away from the mountain hill tops
that they once lived in down to the valley
bottoms has restricted their ability to hunt to farm,
to um gather the firewood, you know, that they
need to gather to build their houses or feed
their stoves and to basically, you know, kind of
carry out the lifestyle that they have for a
very long time. And part of this was based
in the belief that, well, people just got here
recently, there may have only been here for the
past two or 300 years and that they might
be having a negative impact. Well, our excavation, sure,
the people have been doing this for at least
the past 3000 years. They were doing exactly the
same things that they do today cultivating the, you
know, the hillsides with crops, um hunting, maintaining domestic
animals. Um And that this has been a 4000,
um, year long process or, you know, at least,
sorry, I think about a 3500 year long process
in this area. Um And yet this area has
very high biodiversity. Um So part of the work
of ecologists that, um you know, have carried out
work related to our team have found is that
that high biodiversity is actually present in biomes that
are the ones that are modified by humans, that
there there is no pristine nature in this area,
humans have always modified nature. They have always done
this through, you know, burning through um cutting down
firewood through having their animals graze in fields. And
it's precisely in those human modified environments that we
find some of the highest biodiversity, right? When you
get a forest that is untouched, it actually tends
to become quite a um quite a low diversity
forest, you know, with one or two different species
of trees, but in the human modified environments, that
biodiversity is actually extremely high. Um So that's sort
of one of the takeaways from our project in
ZG go is that well, humans are positively have
positively shaped the biodiversity here. Now, how do we
get into not positively shaping the biodiversity? It's when
you have the impacts of massive tourism in the
area or when you start switching to something like
a mono cropped farm, like one of the green
revolution farms, right, that we have um you know,
out here in the United States, that's when we
start having the negative impact on biodiversity. It's when
we start carrying out industrial farming, right? But um
the traditional forms of management around the world do
not impact that biodiversity in the same way. In
fact, they are actually keeping it alive. Um And
it's because of this human action that, that biodiversity
is what it is around the world. Um And
so I think that, you know, conservation movements have
shifted some of their perspective on this, but there's
still this tension. Um YOU know, where humans are,
are seen as negative actors on biodiversity. But most
of the uh well, so I mean, one, you
know, statistic um I have to remember the exact
numbers now. Um I don't know this off the
top of my head, but in indigenous people around
the world are actually responsible for safeguarding most of
the world's biodiversity, right? And they do that very
effectively. Um They have maintained and encouraged biodiversity throughout
history in the lands that are their home. Um
And it's really only when those lambs are removed
from their care and removed from their management that
we see these declines in biodiversity happening much like
what I see in Jojo National Park where I
work. Um So I think that critical, you know,
to this is that we need to return lands
that, you know, have been stolen from people who,
who are their rightful managers. But also that we
really need to listen to the people that are
still actively managing these lands because they have, you
know, when I talked about symbiosis and our role
in nature, they, they have come to the sweet
spot of living in the place that they've lived
in for thousands of years, found the most adaptive
way to live there and the best way to
do things there. And, and they often are, they,
they almost always, not just often are the ones
that have the best solutions for managing it. And
so I think that, you know, the wisdom really
lies there and just listening to the people that
have done this for a long time. Um You
know, and this kind of actually makes me think
a little bit about my childhood in Portugal. You
know, one of the things that I think was
always quite different between, you know, the minute you
cross the Spanish border, right? Versus the Portuguese borders.
Portugal has all of these very small farms where
there's a lot of diversity on each different farm.
And you know, Portuguese agricultural systems are based in
that. Um And then you cross the Spanish border
and you kind of like get these like big
fields with tractors and stuff like that that you
didn't often see in Portugal and that kind of
like diversity in Portuguese. Agriculture is something that is,
you know, broaden the Portuguese diet it's made. Um,
I mean, I think many Portuguese people feel like
it makes our a little tastier having stuff coming
from a smaller farm. Um, AND, you know, it's
really like, you know, maybe it was because Portugal
was not as developed back then that we, that
we were able to preserve this farming system that
was very old and yet, um you know, it's
influenced our regional cuisine and maintained, you know, very
high quality of soil and farming on Portuguese farm.
So, um you know, just to bring it a
little closer to her. And I think that's another
example.
Yeah, that's great. That's great. So earlier, I asked
you about settlements, but you've also done work on
the relationship between grain crops, non grain crops and
the development of states. Could you tell us about
that as well?
Yeah. So, um I've actually done a little bit
less work on that. But, um, but I, I
did write one paper that was a response to
um a book that was written by an author
called James uh Scott. Um ON, um I think
it's called Against The Grain is the title of
the book. And um you know, he was basically
arguing, I think what, what's his premise is that
basically, you know, this development of farming and this
grain economy is something that fuels um the rise
of states and yet there are other types of
states that could emerge without, um, without like a
grain based economy, I think. Um, um, AND, um,
I think, you know, my kind of response to
the book at the time was, yeah, was, you
know, I agree with, you know, perhaps a lot
of what's being said here and yet, you know,
the, the relationship is a lot more complex. There,
there are plenty of state level societies that were
not based on grains. Um, YOU know, just to
think for instance, to South America, um, you know,
in the Andes, those were primarily based on tubers
or potatoes, just as one, you know, kind of
throwaway example there. Um, uh, YOU know, um, but,
and yet at the same time there, there are
plenty of like non state level organizations that are
not based on grain or on exchange of grain.
So I, I kind of, um, oh, I think
that the relationship between grains and states is a
little, um, is a little, um, less direct than,
than, than one would, um, than one would normally,
um, think, and I, I think like for me,
you know, the key kind of defining characteristics of
a state are really about, um, control, right. It's
that it's really about defining territorial boundaries, about taxation,
um about, um, how you control your citizens or
what the hallmarks of a state are versus other
types of social organization. And we all live in
states today that do that
and in the particular case of China, is there
a relationship between mills, rice and social complexity there?
Mhm. Yeah. I mean, those, you know, so those
crops really fuels, um, you know, high degrees of
seds enabled, you know, pop, you know, they really
enabled, um you know, China to support some of
historically, very high and dense populations and, and, and
more so than, you know, the crops themselves. Um
One of the things that you know, is really
fascinating to me when I look at that at
agriculture in China or particularly I should just like
point out um rice farming is the kind of
um beauty of intensive farming systems in China and
how um well, how productive they are. So um
I'll just talk about rice farming systems in China,
you know, for, for a moment. Um So, so
they are um some of the um so in
particular, the area that I work in the Chengdu
plain is one of the most agriculturally productive regions
on earth. It's got some of the highest agricultural
output per hectare or per meter squared. And um
how does you know how, how does this happen?
Right. Um So farming systems are in intrinsic plane
are like this, the fields are never rested. Um
THEY increase in soil fertility over time. So in
the summertime people plant rice in the winter time,
they plant kind of everything that you can possibly
imagine they're like cabbages, potatoes, mushrooms, but you just
like whatever type of vegetable that can grow in
the trin of plane winter it's growing. Um And
then one of the fascinating things about how such
high levels of productivity are achieved in rice fields
there is as follows. So um people plant their
rice and at least traditionally prior to the Green
Revolution, they did so completely organically with no input
of like external fertilizer. So, so the fields are
fertilized in several ways. So people put carp fish
inside the rice paddy. These fish swim around inside
the rice paddy. They bump into the rice stalks,
they eat the insects off the rice. So they're
acting as a pesticide, killing the insects, they then
drop their droppings down to the bottom of the
rice paddy and that forms the fertilizer. Now something
else is in the rice paddy and those are
ducks, the ducks are doing the same thing. They're
swimming around, they're eating the insects, they're also eating
the weeds and then their droppings are fertilizing it.
Then people take, people will often have a pig
um you know, outside their home and they're keeping
the pig there. The pig is eating all of
the, you know, refuse from like the kitchen, everything
that people are throwing away, they're using fertilizer from
the pig. They also ferment their own night soil
or their own, you know, human poop and put
that on the field. Um And then in addition,
um people will cultivate this aquatic fern called a
Zola fern in the patties that, that, that, that,
that grows and it's like green covers the surface
of the water, um that stops weeds from growing.
It then dies, sinks down to the bottom of
the water and further fertilizes the patty. So they're
like what, like, I don't know how many things
I've just mentioned here, they're like five or six
different ways of like increasing fertility in this patty
with like no, not resorting to any type of
chemical fertilizer. So it's really, you know, this is
what these large Chinese cities are based on, right?
It is this agricultural production, it's very intensive. It's
these ingenious farmers using every single possible way you
can think of fertilizing your field to maintain their,
their field fertility. And so, you know, if you
look at the United States um in our highly
mechanized, you know, green revolution forms of farming, one
of the things that we use here is this
huge external input of nitrogenous synthetic fertilizers, pest besides
herbicides. And you name it right in this system
in China, it's this totally closed loop organic system
where soils increase in fertility over time as people
cultivate them here, our soils are decline in fertility
over time. Um So, you know, it's, it's this
really beau and then, and then there's this, there's
this symbiosis with plants and animals inside the rice
paddy, you know, and then, and then that's extra
production, right? Because you have the eggs from the
ducks, you have the duck meat itself, you have
the flesh from the fish that you're eating. And
so you've also got protein that's being produced in
your patty with no extra carbon emissions with no
extra, you know, input into it. So it's this
like ecosystem form of farming that is really in
a closed loop, which is just amazing and it's
the most highly, it is per capita, the most
highly productive form of farming in the entire globe
that I know of actually. Um SO, so you
know, um it's really on this basis, right, on
this ingenuity of like millennia, and we know that
these systems of farming, by the way, have been
in place for millennia because we actually find models
of like the pigs next to the rice paddy
fields in Han Dynasty tombs that date to about
200 BC. We find models of the carp fish
inside the rice paddies in these Han Dynasty tombs.
So we know that the system has been in
place for at least 2000 years. Um And, and,
and it's, it's, it's a beautiful one, right? But
another example of how people have like really uniquely
adapted to um to their environment.
Yeah. So everything that we've been talking about here
today uh uh about agriculture, sustainability, biodiversity, and so
on. Do you think that we can apply this
knowledge with political and ethical goals in mind, like
for example, helping alleviate global hunger and enhancing food
security.
Yeah, I absolutely do. And, and you know, my
takeaway like from that is that so people have
often um so I'll talk about the Green Revolution,
right? So the architects of the Green Revolution like
like Norman Borlaug had that goal in mind, right,
which was to alleviate um human hunger and suffering.
And they thought, in my opinion, they thought wrongly
that the only way to do this was through
the expansion of Green revolution technology. So hybrids or
genetically modified seeds, me um the application of synthetic
fertilizers um that are developed through the Harbor Bosch
process, um herbicides and pesticides and mechanization of farming.
They thought that that was the only way that
we could alleviate hunger around the world. I think
they're wrong. I think that they had the best
of intentions maybe. But I think that they didn't
stop to listen to what the farmers of the
world had to say to them. And in many
instances, the introduction of this highly mechanized form of
agriculture has done the opposite. It has wrecked these
traditional forms of farming around the world. So one
example that I always give um there is an
example that a colleague of mine um called Steve
Lansing worked on on the island of Bali. And
what he showed on Bali is that prior to
the introduction of of the Green Revolution, farmers had
this really unique way of farming their rice paddies
similar to what I described to you in China.
Um AND um you know, they were in this
completely organic system and they reduced pest load through
their own water temple system which carefully coordinate the
release of water to each rice paddy. Um And
that reduced pest pest loads. Well, the green revolution
came and they were told just plant as much
rice as often as you can, even if it's
like three times a year and just keep it
going. What happened was there was this massive bloom
in Locusts that ended up eating most, you know,
after a couple of years of bumper harvest, the
pest explosion happened, people had to just apply massive
amounts of pesticide. And I mean to the point
that they actually have to fly the pesticide by
airplane which, you know, ended up killing almost everything,
right. And, and yet the systems, in the end,
this green revolution system of farming that was introduced
to the area that was supposedly going to be
so much more highly productive, ended up being less
productive than the traditional systems of farming. So I
think that, you know, when we think about about
hunger and when we think about not having sufficient
access to food, often the reasons for that have
very little to do with the fact that farmers
don't know what they're doing because they always do.
And it has a lot more to do with
political economy with grain sequestration on the behalf of
governments. I mean, I mean, you know, I think
about the United States a lot of it has
to do with unequal trade agreements. Right. So, um,
you know, I live in the United States right
now and, you know, one of the major, you
know, things that the Clinton administration did here was
to sign the North American free trade agreement, which
essentially allows the United States to ship all of
its excess corn to Central America or Mexico, specifically
at below the price of production. How can a
Mexican farmer compete with that? How can a Mexican
farmer compete with free corn on the market? He
can't, he can't. And, and this is what is
creating poverty and hunger around the world. It's not
that these farmers don't know what to do on
their fields, they do, it's that they are parts
of unequal treaties and global economies that are disadvantaging
them. And often these, you know, like where, where
are the problem here in the United States? Right?
We are the ones that are rolling out these
types of unequal treaties and forcing farmers around the
world poverty because we don't want our American farmers
to suffer um to suffer the effects of overproducing
something they didn't need to produce so much of
in the first place. Um So, so, you know,
when I, when I see the nexus of this
problem, I see it as being a lot more
about social inequality and about the, the sort of
nefarious role really that countries like this country have
played in, in kind of dictating the face of
global economies. Um And, and less about what, what
farmers less about if farmers know how to do
something. I think so. So basically my take home
message of farmers know exactly what they're doing. We
should listen to them and let them just keep
on doing the stuff that they've done for millennia
and what the rest of the world, particularly this
country needs to stop doing is it needs to
stop interfering in other people's economies. Um And that
will solve the issue.
OK. So I have one last question then and
this is more directly uh directed to climate change.
So, um do you think that acquiring knowledge about
the circumstances under which humans managed or failed to
find adaptive solutions to climate change can help us
tackle climate change and its effects even in industrialized
and post industrial societies?
Yeah, I I do and I think that you
know what the archaeological record can contribute here is
really a deep time perspectives of where the limits
of adaptation lie, right? So we are the warmest
multi century in the past 100,000 years. Um Right
now we are warmer that. So, so around the
globe, it's really only over the past 10,000 years
and in most places around the world, only about
the last 6000 years that people have first started
domesticating plants and animals. We are warmer than anything
we've ever known in that entire history. And, and,
and, and looking at where under what temperature constraints,
under what type of ecological constraints people have cultivated
and domesticated plants and animals in the past can
tell us something about where the limits of adaptation
lie in my research right now. I feel that
we are barreling that large portions of the world,
particularly. Um YOU know, the ones that are currently
going to experience some of the greatest impacts of
climate change are barreling out of climatic conditions that
we have known since people first started domesticating plants
and animals. And I think like the archaeological record
can actually bring the greatest urgency to our climate
crisis because it tells us that we're entering conditions
that humanity has never known everything about life as
we know it today started 6000 years ago and
we are barreling outside of those conditions and we
have no evidence that the plants we domesticated can
adapt to the temperatures that large parts of the
world are experiencing as we speak. And that will
only intensify as we move forward. Um So I
I think that what the archaeological record can really
contribute here is the urgency of the situation um
in, in that it can show, you know, this
is everything we've known and this is where we're
headed and we're headed, we are headed in um
into uncharted territory, I think is uh what, what
the lessons and there is no analog for the
conditions that we are headed in. And there has
been no analog over the entire course of plant
and animal domestication. So it's, it's a terrifying thing
to head into no analog conditions because you have
no data for it, right? You have no data
um for how things will adapt. And you know,
in the case of rice, on in this paper,
we're working on, it looks like large parts of
um of Asia will surpass the fundamental niche for
rice. It will be too hot um for us
to cultivate rice in many parts of the world
um probably within the next 20 or something years.
And you know, I'll just point to kind of
some impacts of this that I think are happening
already um last year. Um LARGELY because of climatic
impacts India restricted the export of all non basmati
types of rice. So, so there's basmati rice and
then you have Mansouri rice, which is the other
main type of rice that India produces. It halted
the export of it because there was not enough
due to the impacts of climate change due to
these 50 C temperatures that you know, people on
the Indian subcontinent were experiencing last summer that had
a direct impact on crop production there. And that
is because um rice like most plants, you know,
photosynthesis starts to shut down around 40 C, it's
an enzymatic reaction. And when, you know, like most
enzymes, when you, when you surpass, you know, a
certain temperature threshold, the chemical reaction shuts down. And
that's exactly what happened when you start hitting temperatures
of 50 C. And this is going on for
like 1015, sometimes 30 day periods. You, you're, you're,
you're killing the photosynthetic pathway in that plant. You,
you're causing it to die. Right. Um And I
think that this is going to have an Absolutely,
I think, I think we're about to experience what
will happen with the impacts of climate change on
our food supply probably, you know, within the next
five or 10 years. Um And I think that
global governments are just simply not paying enough attention
to this um because they don't understand that plants
have limits that there are, there are limits to
adaptation.
So I, I mean, we're really talking here about
a potential complete disruption of the food system across
the globe. Yeah.
Yeah, I think, I think we potentially are so,
you know, with forward, so, so, you know, forward
looking climate objections are based on what we do
about carbon emissions, right? And so even if you
take the kind of middle of the road, you
know, we're kind of having some type of, you
know, Paris agreement where, you know, all the countries
around the world are kind of committed to reducing
their emissions, which frankly, we haven't seen too much
of right now. Right. But, you know, if you,
if you kind of operate under those assumptions, we're
still seeing this trend, right? It's less bad than
it could be. Um, BECAUSE it could be very
bad. But even under those middle of the road
scenarios, we're seeing this trend and basically what we're
seeing happen. So there are only a couple of
areas of the world that have mean annual temperatures
of like above 28.5 C. Those are places like
the Sahara desert, the Arabian Gulf. And what the
what climate models predict is that those areas like
the Sahara Desert and like the Arabian Gulf are
going to expand across the world. Um They're going
to characterize large parts of South Asia, large parts
of Southeast Asia. Billions of people live in these
places, right? And that's not to talk about Africa
or about, you know, um other equatorial parts of
the world, right? Billions of people live in these
places and billions of people cultivate crops in these
places. And yet forward looking climate projections are essentially
looking at at a situation where plant to life
cannot survive except for a couple of very heat
tolerant plants because of such extreme temperatures, right? Um
And that, that's something that should be terrifying to
us and should really spur us, you know, into
action and that I don't think that, um you
know, that I don't think um you know, I
I don't think the climate community has emphasized enough
is the impact that that changes in temperature have
on ecology, right? And on plants that grow in
them. Um And yet those things are essential to
our life, right? We cannot live without them. Um
So, so, you know, that's the message I would
share is that like we've got to hold our
global governments accountable for that, for this. We need
to stop burning fossil fuels urgently. Um And you
know, this is really a global issue. Humanity has
to bound together and hold our politicians accountable. Um
First, they need to stop putting in new fossil
fuel pipelines. And second, we need to transition our
economies to ones that are not reliant on the
burning of fossil fuels um to try to do
something about this.
So doctors, let's perhaps, and on that note, it's
not the most, the most optimistic one, but I
mean,
you know, the most optimistic one.
Yeah, at least it's a realistic one. So, and
where can people find you and your work on
the internet?
Um Yeah. So uh I have um a web
page which is very outdated, that is Jade getters.com.
Um I'm also all of my research articles are
on Research Gate, um which is, you know, where
um kind of a popular place um where they
do that. I'm on Twitter as well, although I've
been on a lot less recently. Um GIVEN recent
changes on that platform that, you know, occasionally I
tweet about climate change on that platform to um
um Yeah, that's sort of where I am, where
I am primarily on the internet.
So I will leave some links to that in
the description of the interview. And thank you so
much again for taking the time to come on
the show. It's been a real pleasure to talk
to you.
Yeah, it's been a win.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel, Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall. Her
ma J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s friends,
David Sloan Wilson, Yaar, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter,
Romani Charlotte, Bli, Nicole Barba, Adam hunt, Pavlo Stassi,
Nale Me, Gary G Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and
YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden. Broder Douglas
Fry Franca Lati Gilon Cortez or Scott Zachary FTDW
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio
Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Oin David Williams Di
A Costa, Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey, Junior, Old Ebon,
Starry Michael Bailey then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn,
Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark Temple, Thomas
Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert
Jessica. A week in the Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perros, Kate Von
Goler, Alexander Albert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi
Perpendicular J Ner Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David
Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers is our web,
Jim Frank Luca Stein, Tom Ween, Bernard N Corti
Dixon Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carl Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan
Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all